#### Recommendation 5: Retire legacy systems
# Retire legacy systems, invest in shared standards and upgrade infrastructure

In absolute terms, there has been: “a lack of sufficient investment at the true scale needed to fully move on from core legacy systems”. In some parts of government, such as state pension provision, delivery is still reliant on thirty- and forty-year old IT systems. The previous strategic focus on transactional services means that:

> new service developments have been built on top of what already exists. Across government, outdated IT systems and its ageing data are a key source of inefficiency and create a major constraint to improving and modernising government services. Many of these ageing systems were built several decades ago (National Audit Office)

Meanwhile, short-term political incentives can mean that “fixing the plumbing” never rises to the top of the priority list, and the NHS in particular suffers from a culture of “leap-frogging” where investment in adopting new technologies is prioritised over fixing the data and infrastructure needed to make this investment worthwhile.

The lack of will to modernise at a foundational level means public services are not able to benefit from the potential efficiency gains created by emerging technologies. As health technology expert Dr Jess Morley noted,

> There seems to be little recognition of the fact that the NHS's information infrastructure is far from being fit-for-purpose for implementing [emerging and data-driven] technologies. Considerable more investment in the basics is needed before any of the high-tech ambitions are realistic … since the failure of the national programme for IT, there has been almost no investment in the basic information infrastructure that would enable this to be possible. NHS hospitals often share patients, but they rarely share records.

As noted throughout this paper, “infrastructure” is not a single thing but an interrelated set of systems and ways of working, and similar problems occur across public bodies. While the NHS, which boasts more than 7000 data controllers, might be unique in scale, the same lack of interoperability is experienced in other contexts. Sam Nutt from LOTI shared with us the laborious administrative processes needed to facilitate data sharing for joined-up local delivery and observed that “90% of the plumbing for data/tech isn't up to scratch in local government, and we need to fix this before we could ever deploy AI”.

Government can take active steps to remedy this, “intervening at strategic points to shift services markets in favour of common data standards and interoperability, and better, safer data-sharing across systems.” However, the data landscape remains fragmented, built on top of legacy systems that are often maintained by expensive third-parties, locked-in through substandard procurement processes and a lack of good strategic digital policymaking. In the Gordian Knot of digital government, everything may seem to be connected, but the work of reforming infrastructure must happen in parallel to the cultural changes necessary to improve approaches to staffing, skills development and collaboration.

This is deeply unsexy work of digital transformation: whereas generative AI bots, dashboards and predictive analytics might offer a hint of the future, developing and rolling out standards and retiring out-of-date technologies relies on engaging with the past. No mature digital government can move forward without putting these foundations in place; if Labour is to deliver and continue delivering, cross-government collaboration to set these changes in train must be mandated.

The promise to create an Office for National Statistics was included in the 1997 Labour Manifesto. Labour must build on this legacy and create a new Office for Data Linkage overseen by the UK Statistics Authority.

The sole purpose of the Office for Data Linkage should be to curate and link the data that is held by government departments and make it available for analysis, research and policy development. Legal frameworks should be introduced to compel government departments to share the data they hold with the Office for Data Linkage, replacing ad-hoc and opaque data sharing agreements between departments and local and national government bodies. This must be overseen by a robust governance body, populated by representatives from civil society and members of communities who are over-represented in government datasets should oversee arrangements for access.  All requests (and their outcomes) should be made publicly available to support transparency and accountability.

Investment should also be made in infrastructure to support access, including mandating the adoption of interoperability standards, legislating for data portability and creating open API’s. Minimum standards: “for data sharing, APIs and interoperability” should be be expected of any digital solution supporting the delivery of public services” to increase competitive pressures in the market for public sector technology solutions and drive down cost.